# Manipulate Motion Vectors

A vapoursynth plugin to do potentially useful things with motion vectors that have already been generated.

## Installation

The plugin is available on PyPI and can be installed with:

```sh
python -m pip install vapoursynth-manipmv
```

## Overview

Motion vectors are useful for a variety of video processing tasks, and there is a long history of tooling related generating and using them. This historical tooling has generally coupled creating the motion vectors and consuming them into one plugin, MVTools. But it is the author's opinion that decoupled tooling with a standard interface is reasonable and desirable. There is not quite a standard interface among the various versions and ports of MVTools so for now this plugin specifically targets the conventions used by [dubhater/vapoursynth-mvtools](https://github.com/dubhater/vapoursynth-mvtools) (see the [assumed conventions](#assumed-conventions) section for details).

## Functions

### ExpandAnalysisData

Expands the binary `MVTools_MVAnalysisData` frame prop into separate frame props for convenience.

```
int       Analysis_MagicKey
int       Analysis_Version
int[x, y] Analysis_BlockSize
int       Analysis_Pel
int       Analysis_LevelCount
int       Analysis_DeltaFrame
int       Analysis_Backwards
int       Analysis_CpuFlags
int       Analysis_MotionFlags
int[x, y] Analysis_FrameSize
int[x, y] Analysis_Overlap
int[x, y] Analysis_BlockCount
int       Analysis_BitsPerSample
int[x, y] Analysis_ChromaRatio
int[x, y] Analysis_Padding
```

#### Usage
```py
manipmv.ExpandAnalysisData(vnode clip)
```

#### Parameters
- clip:\
A clip generated by `mv.Analyse()` or which otherwise follows its conventions.

#### Examples
```py
# Programmatically reference block size used
clip = vs.core.std.BlankClip()
msuper = clip.mv.Super()
forward = msuper.mv.Analyse()

annotated = forward.manipmv.ExpandAnalysisData()
block_size_x, block_size_y = annotated.get_frame(0).props["Analysis_BlockSize"]
print(f"Blocks used for analysis are {block_size_x}x{block_size_y}")
```

### ScaleVect

>[!WARNING]
>Arbitrary scaling of motion vectors is possible and conceptually reasonable and is thus allowed by this plugin. However subsequent operations which use the motion vectors may not support all of the scaled properties. For example scaling 8x8 blocks by 5x results in 40x40 blocks which aren't something Analyse supports generating.

Scales `image_size`, `block_size`, `overlap`, `padding`, and the individual `motion_vector`s contained in `Analyse` output by arbitrary and independent `x` and `y` factors. This is mostly useful to use motion vectors generated on a downscaled clip to perform operations on the full size clip (e.g. calculating motion vectors at 1080p and applying them at 4K).

#### Usage
```py
manipmv.ScaleVect(vnode clip[, int scaleX=1, int scaleY=scaleX])
```

#### Parameters
- clip:\
A clip generated by `mv.Analyse()` or which otherwise follows its conventions.
- scaleX:\
The scale factor to use horizontally.\
This is limited to an 8 bit value, but practical scale factors are likely single digit.\
Default value is `1` (no scaling).
- scaleY:\
The scale factor to use vertically.\
This is limited to an 8 bit value, but practical scale factors are likely single digit.\
Default value is the same as `scaleX`.

#### Examples
```py
# Use vectors from 1080p clip to denoise 4K clip
SCALE = 2
HPAD = 16
VPAD = 16
clip = vs.core.std.BlankClip(width=3840, height=2160)
small_clip = clip.resize.Bilinear(clip.width // SCALE, clip.height // SCALE)

small_msuper = small_clip.mv.Super(hpad=HPAD, vpad=VPAD)
small_forward = small_msuper.mv.Analyse()
small_backward = small_msuper.mv.Analyse(isb=True)

big_msuper = clip.mv.Super(hpad=HPAD * SCALE, vpad=VPAD * SCALE)
upscaled_forward = small_forward.manipmv.ScaleVect(SCALE)
upscaled_backward = small_backward.manipmv.ScaleVect(SCALE)

denoised = clip.mv.Degrain1(big_msuper, upscaled_backward, upscaled_forward)
denoised.set_output()
```

### ShowVect

Draws generated vectors onto a clip.

#### Usage
```py
manipmv.ShowVect(vnode clip, vnode vectors[, bool useSceneChangeProps=True])
```

#### Parameters
- clip:\
A YUV clip with 8/10/12/16 bit integer bitdepth and dimensions which match the vectors.
- vectors:\
A clip generated by `mv.Analyse()` or which otherwise follows its conventions. The first frame of this clip will be fetched with the filter is instantiated to determine the `pel` and `block_size` used by the vectors.
- useSceneChangeProps:\
Skips drawing vectors if frame props indicate they are from a different scene than the current frame of the clip. Specifically if the vectors are forwards then `_SceneChangePrev` and `Scenechange` are examined, and if the vectors are backwards `_SceneChangeNext` is examined. There are a few different filters which can stamp these frame props, but `mv.SCDetection()` should be preferred when visualizing vectors generated with `delta` greater than 1.

#### Examples
```py
# This is not a terribly exciting example since the BlankClip doesn't move...
clip = vs.core.std.BlankClip(width=1920, height=1080)

msuper = clip.mv.Super()
forward = msuper.mv.Analyse()

clip = clip.mv.SCDetection(forward)
debug = clip.manipmv.ShowVect(forward)
debug.set_output()
```

## Assumed Conventions

> [!NOTE]
> No MVTools version really documents its conventions explicitly since they are considered to be internal. So the descriptions in this section should not be considered official, but they are hopefully correct, and serve to at least document the assumptions this plugin is making.

The [dubhater/vapoursynth-mvtools](https://github.com/dubhater/vapoursynth-mvtools) plugin stores all of its working data for motion vectors as binary data in vapoursynth frame props on the clip which results from calling `mv.Analyse()`. Specifically there are two props of interest `MVTools_MVAnalysisData` and `MVTools_vectors`.

All of this data is serialized rather implictly from C++ structs. Most of these structs contain only signed integers (even for fields which do not have logical negative interpretations) and bytes are written with native endianness. For deserialization I have chosen to interpret fields that should not be negative (e.g. width, height, size) as unsigned and always use little endian byte order. These nuances are hopefully not relevant in practice as the positive integer range of a signed 32 bit integer is still much larger than practical video sizes and almost every host running MVTools is likely to be little endian natively. Still it would be nice conceptually if future motion vector work could make these conventions explicit; for this reason the types below will be listed with the signedness I think they should have.

### MVTools_MVAnalysisData

This just contains some metadata about the context in which the vectors were generated. The length of this data is expected to always be 84 bytes (21 32-bit integers) in the following order:

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The `magic_key` and `version` appear to be uninitialized by the MVTools plugin and so have no usable data in them.

```
u32 magic_key
u32 version
u32 block_size_x
u32 block_size_y
u32 pel
u32 level_count
i32 delta_frame
u32 backwards
u32 cpu_flags
u32 motion_flags
u32 width
u32 height
u32 overlap_x
u32 overlap_y
u32 block_count_x
u32 block_count_y
u32 bits_per_sample
u32 chroma_ratio_y
u32 chroma_ratio_x
u32 padding_x
u32 padding_y
```

### MVTools_vectors

This contains the actual motion vector data for all levels of motion vector calculation. The structure of a single motion vector is simply:

```
i32 x
i32 y
u64 sad
```

These are serialized without any padding (16 bytes per vector). Each level is structured as:

```
u32 size
[] vectors
```

Again without any padding. So for example a level with 10 vectors would have a size value of 164 (16 bytes per vector * 10 vectors + 4 bytes for the size).

This is ultimately structured as:

```
u32 size
u32 valid
[] levels
```

Again without any padding. The value stored in size is therefore expected to be equivalent to the size which vapoursynth reports for the frame property. The valid value is expected to be 0 for situations where motion vectors are not present (e.g. the first frame of forwards vectors) and 1 for situations where motion vectors are present.

## Maintenance notes

>[!NOTE]
>This section is just so the maintainer doesn't forget how the repo is setup. This isn't really relevant for users.

Tests can be run with
```sh
zig build test --summary all
```

In theory everything is setup such that the following steps are sufficient to build the library, create a github release, and publish all the wheels to PyPI.

```sh
zig build version -- inc --patch
git commit -am "Bumping patch version"
git push
```

The release body can then be edited to whatever seems appropriate.

This depends on a number of third party github actions so any one of those could break. Zig could also make it easier or harder to get the version from build.zig.zon and the approach may need to be tweaked. For now it seems usable.
